once around the Helix Nebula.
So, the Helix Nebula is fairly low in
the sky from my location here in
Cambridge in the UK. It's in the
southerntherly part of the constellation
of Aquarius with a declination of -20.
So 20° below the celestial equator,
which means that from my point of view,
it only makes it to about 8° above the
horizon. Um, just above the hedge at the
bottom of my observing site. So somewhat
difficult. only get a few days each year
when I can actually point the telescope
at this, but I have done and I've got
some nice photographs.
The Helix Nebula cataloged as NGC, new
general catalog 7239
and uh you can see the location there
marked with the red numbers.
discovered by this guy Carl Ludvig
Harding. And it says most likely before
1824 because the records are a little
bit incomplete, but uh I absolutely love
the photographs of this uh that people
have generated through various
instruments. Uh and they're all
different. Everybody has a different
idea of how to interpret the color
palette. Um so there's quite a nice
amateur grade one for you. Here's a
professional image showing the Helix
Nebula in much more detail. And this is
a planetary nebula. Nothing to do with
planets. This is a dying star. A sunlike
star has ejected most of its outer
atmosphere and left just the central hot
white dwarf star. That little pin prick
of light right in the center there. And
you can see how the material changes
color. It's bluish in the center,
yellowower in the mid part, and then
fades away to red and then dark red at
the outside. And that's telling us
things about the uh way it's being
illuminated by the light from the
central star, which is a very very hot
white dwarf star. So, a lot of very high
energy light, a lot of blue. But it's
also telling us about the chemical
composition. And the uh pinkish red
color around the outside is a mixture of
a lot of dirt and dust plus uh large
amounts of hydrogen giving us that red
color. And the yellow that is from
helium, unburnt helium that was uh
ejected later on. So the outer layers
were unburnt hydrogen then helium from
deeper in and in the center. then the
mix would have been dominated by carbon
and oxygen which tend to give us some of
those bluer tinges as well.
Distance-wise somewhere in the 650 to
700 light years depending on which
source you look at. Uh the most recent
is GIA saying 655. So at the nearer end
of that and it does put it as one of the
nearest planetary nebula to the Earth.
Um, and that's why it's so spectacular
from our point of view.
We see it as a ring around the central
star. It's actually more of a prolate
spheroid, a rugby ball shape or American
football shape object. And um that's uh
round about just under three light years
in diameter along the long axis tilted
at our line of sight by 20 to 40°
and that uh gives it the flattened shape
when we're looking at it. One side of
the disc is definitely
more compressed than the other side.
probably because the material is
impacting a denser region of the
interstellar clouds between the stars
and being slowed down in his expansion.
And the image in the center there is an
infrared image. And that just goes to
show that uh depending on what
wavelength you look at these objects
with, you can represent the colors any
way you like. And you can get more
detail by choosing the color palette to
bring out anything that you're looking
for.
So the European Space Agency provided
this lovely map
overlaid on the image of the Helix
Nebula showing the different features
that have been identified. So we've got
the white dwarf right in the middle.
We've got the inner disc region that you
can see highlighted. then the outer ring
and then we've got the souththeast and
northwest plumes. Um and then further
out various shock waves and arcs and the
asymmetry of it is particularly visible
there in that it's uh much compressed up
towards the northeast. So that's where
the material is definitely pushing up
against and meeting some resistance from
a dense part of the uh interstellar
medium. Whereas down to the lower right
on the west side, it's more free to
expand.
So this material, the temperature, it's
about 1,800 Kelvin in the central
region. So, not quite hot enough to glow
as a black body radiation um effect into
the visible spectrum at all, but
certainly very bright in the infrared.
And this is an image from the Spitzer
Space Telescope. And then further out,
the temperature obviously drops away as
you get further from the white dwarf
star down to around 900 Kelvin in the
outer regions. So, glowing into the uh
lower regions of the infrared there.
You can already see there's a lot of
detail in these images. And I absolutely
love this one. This is again from
Spitzer, infrared image. So, we're
picking up the infrared uh light from
the central star. We're seeing a red
glow from around it, which is a dust
disc. And then further out, highlighted
in the uh turquoise blue color, you can
see all of this material. And if you
look at it, you can see streamers that
seem to be pointing inwards that look
like comets. These cometry knots as
they've been described. And uh there are
just an incredible number of these. Um
we have some fantastic images of them.
This is from the Subaru telescope. And
what you can see is that these are
little dense globules with tails on
them. As many as 40,000. Someone's
actually attempted to count them. I I
think that's uh going to be not really a
sport I would get involved in, but uh
there's a lot of these anyway. And the
telescopes we have today are phenomenal.
They can zoom right in. And we have
another image here, a real closeup of
these cometry knots. Now these are
probably rally tailor instability.
It's the effect of different densities.
It's just like a lava lamp. In fact, uh
if you have remember uh what happens
with a lava lamp, you have a heat source
at the bottom and two emissible liquids
and you you get these uh fingers of
material that rise up, cool, and then
fall back down again as they uh
circulate round. and they create these
sorts of cometry knots inside your lava
lamp. Uh you get the exact same effect
wherever there are two immissible fluids
and a heat source. And of course the
heat source, they're all pointing
towards it. They're all pointing towards
the central white dwarf star. And then
the uh tails lead back in the shadow of
the dense blobs.
So, how old is this uh Helix Nebula
then? Well, it's pretty young actually
in terms of being a nebula. The inner
disc was only ejected just over 6,500
years ago and it's expanding. We can
measure the Doppler shift and you can
see that it's expanding at 40 km/
second. So, twice as fast as the Earth
goes around the Sun. and that the outer
layers date back twice as far, 12,100
years, and are expanding more slowly at
only 32. So, of course, what's happening
is the inner layers are catching up with
and overtaking the slower moving outer
layers. And it's that that's creating
those rally tailor instabilities as the
hot younger material is trying to
overtake the cooler slower moving outer
layers creating all of those uh cometry
knots.
And this tells us really that the outer
material probably wasn't ejected in the
same process. The inner material was
ejected as the star finally transformed
itself into a white dwarf and blew the
last remaining parts of its atmosphere
away. But the outer material was ejected
much earlier. No, 6,000 years earlier
during the last phases of the stars life
as an AGB star, an asimtotic giant
branch star, which is like an advanced
stage of a red giant uh where it's gone
through the ordinary red giant phase,
ignited helium burning to form carbon
and oxygen in the core.
And then the uh carbon oxygen core has
started to build up. So it's ended up
with hydrogen
burning in a shell overlaying a helium
burning shell overlaying a dead inert
carbon oxygen core. And when that
happens the as the processes go through
it tends to kick off the outer layers
while the star is still burning. And
that's why we have those outer shells.
The central star itself, a white dwarf,
magnitude 13.5. So you can pick that up
with uh amateur astrophotography
equipment these days.
And uh this is tiny,
only 2.5%
the size of soul, our sun, 17,000
kilometers across. So smaller than the
Earth, but weighs in at uh 68% the mass
of our sun. So an awful lot of
material's been ejected from this star.
It was considerably more massive than
our sun is today when it was uh fully
alive and burning, but only 68% has
remained in that inner core. the rest
having been ejected in the multiple
rounds of uh the nebula formation. Now
these white dwarf stars are always
classified D. Uh they are class D from
their spectrum. Um and this one is
specifically D AO
which tells us about the temperature and
the composition of it. And it is very
hot indeed. temperature 120,000 Kelvin.
Our sun is just 6,000. So this is 20
times hotter. And it's that gives it
that blue color. And there is an
enormous amount of very strong
ultraviolet light coming away as well.
This would be beginning to emit soft
X-rays at this sort of temperature as
well.
Now we saw around it in the infrared
image a pale red uh smudge around the
central star and that is a disc of
material around about uh going from 30
to 100 astronomical units. So that's the
orbit of Neptune at 30 astronomical
units out to beyond where our kiper belt
uh would be with all those icy bodies.
And indeed, this seems to be made of icy
bodies as well. Lots of dust picking up
the infrared light, perhaps fragments of
dust that have resulted from the
collisions of a lot of these small icy
worlds that seem to be still in orbit
around the white dwarf. And thousands of
what we call exoc comets. And so these
are again
dirty snowballs of material that have
ended up in this region and are being
strongly illuminated by the very high
energy beams coming from the white dwarf
itself. U perhaps pointing to the fact
that there is sort of not only a kipa
belt but a an cloudlike structure around
the star.
Now, in 2024,
periodic variations in the stars output
seemed to suggest that there was a
planet around about 2.3 times the
Earth's mass. So, a super Earth going
around the uh star itself. And I don't
have a photograph of that. Um, what's in
this artist's impression looks an awful
lot like the moon to me. Um, but uh it's
a good representation of a a rocky body
that seems to be in a fixed orbit around
the white dwarf, showing that the
planets or at least the cores of the
planets seem to be able to survive the
ejection of the nebula. And in 2025,
X-ray
uh studies by the Chandra Space
Telescope revealed that there are such
material going into the white dwarf uh
as to suggest that it's the stripping of
a Jupiterized
object like a a large gas giant planet
orbiting close into the white dwarf and
beginning to be torn. torn apart into
that disc, adding material into it that
will uh spiral in and get superheated.
Soft X-rays coming off. Um and so there
again a survivor. Uh although I don't
think this one's going to survive very
long at the rate that we seem to think
that uh the material is being dragged
away from it.
And so here's that lovely
multi-wavelength image of the Helix
Nebula with the extreme outer layers all
beginning to show there and that dust
disc in the pink reddish region in the
middle with the white dwarf. This is uh
infrared with added visible and
ultraviolet light overlaid on top of it
giving us this false color but
nevertheless fantastic view. Um, and
with that, I will leave you with the
final picture here of the Helix Nebula.
Um, and it's such a beautiful object. If
you do get a chance to find this, and if
you live further south than I do, you've
got more chance. As I say, I only get
about two days a year when this is above
the hedge and observable from my
location due to that negative -20 of the
uh declination in the constellation of
Aquarius makes it somewhat tricky from
my point of view, but from the southern
hemisphere definitely much easier to
observe. It'll be much higher up and uh
should be uh truly spectacular. So
that's it. Thanks very much for
listening.